Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Bradley Hillier-Smith. He's an
associate lecturer at the University of St. Andrews in
the UK and today we're going to talk about
his book, The Ethics of State Responses to Refugees.
So Doctor Hillier Smith, welcome to the show. It's
a big pleasure to everyone.
Um, THANK you for having me. It's a pleasure
to be here.
Uh, SO, let me ask you, uh, before we
get into the actual content of your book. So
what motivated you to write this book? I mean,
is it because of the current, uh, political moment
we're going through, or at least Some of our
recent political history in terms of uh refugee crisis
and dealing with the refugees politically? Is it because
it's just a topic that you've been interested in
or both or something else?
Yeah, well, thank you. Well. I've always had, uh,
an interest in migration ethics, um, but it was.
My interest really uh developed uh in 2015, 2016,
uh, when there was a so-called refugee crisis with
significant numbers of refugees arriving in Europe and at
the time, um. I was involved in a lot
of charity work trying to support refugees and um.
And that took me to Calais in France, uh,
which is, well, for those of you who don't
know, um. There was an informal refugee settlement in
Calais in northern France, where refugees from different nationalities,
Syria, Sudan, Afghanistan, and so forth, um. They would
Stay in this informal settlement in Calais, uh, attempting
to reach the UK to claim asylum. And I
was a long term, uh, volunteer there, um, in
aid distribution. And then, uh, there was a particular
event that had a really profound impact on me,
which was in, I think February 2016, the French
authorities decided to clear, uh, a portion of the
camp. And so I was there and I witnessed
hundreds of riot police. Enter the camp, uh, rip
refugees from their shelters, um, use violence, beating refugees
with batons, uh, tear gas, water cannon, including against
women and children. I saw one refugee attempt to
commit suicide, um, to, uh, protest against his, his,
his being arrested, um. And and and it was
a horrendous experience, and in the aftermath of the
event, uh, I think. Around 100 refugee children went
missing. Um, NO one knew where they were, and
so. I was profoundly shocked by what I had
witnessed, um, in 21st century Western Europe, and it
obviously struck me as this is a profoundly unethical,
wrong response for states to adopt in response to,
um, innocent refugees seeking safety. So if this is.
An unethical response, so I wanted to know, well,
what would an ethical response to refugees be, um.
So that's what motivated me to do some research
on this topic, try to understand what an ethical
response would be. And so the book is, um,
the culmination of that effort, that research, uh, where
I seek to develop an understanding of the specific
moral obligations that states have towards refugees and those
obligations form the components of what an ethical response
would be.
No, that it's a very interesting topic and, uh,
I mean, one of the main reasons why I,
uh, wanted to have you on the show was
because I, I think not only it's a very,
uh, I mean, it's something that people have been
dealing with in recent years and even are dealing
now, are dealing with now. Uh, AND, uh, also
because it's a topic that, uh, to be very
honest, I haven't explored before on the show, so
I think it's very important to talk about it.
Uh, I wanted to ask you, what is a
refugee, and I mean, I, I, I imagine that
you will give me the legal or political definition
here, right? So I mean, I, and I think
it's important to clarify for the audience what a
refugee is because Uh, refugee has a different status
than what we could consider a regular migrant, for
example, not only in terms of international law, but
also in terms of how the national law of
each country works and deals with refugees. So what
is the definition?
Oh, good, um, well, you're exactly right. There is
the official definition in international law. Um, WHICH is
a refugee is a person who, owing to a
well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of their race,
their religion, their nationality, the membership of a particular
social group, or their political opinion, is outside the
country of their nationality and because of that fear
of persecution is unwilling to avail themselves of the
protection of that country. So that's the legal definition
as set out in the 1951, um, Geneva Convention
relating to the status of refugee. Now, of course,
a number of philosophers have contested this definition as
being arbitrarily narrow. One of the primary reasons why
philosophers suggest this definition is arbitrarily narrow is it
seems to have, uh, an undue focus on persecution
in, in particular. So why is it only for
reasons of persecution that we should understand our people
as refugees? So this might not cover, for example,
refugees who are displaced because of war or conflict
or generalized violence or environmental degradation or catastrophe. People
who are forced to flee their country in order
to seek adequate safety elsewhere, but not necessarily because
they've been persecuted on the basis of their identity,
for example, right? So for example, um, Ukrainian refugees.
Might not necessarily be persecuted by it per se.
Rather, they're displaced as a result of war and
conflict and severe threats to their lives, um, and
they're certainly refugees, although they might not necessarily fit
the, uh, conventional definition. So in practice, um. States
will, uh, adhere to a a broader definition and
that's what a lot of philosophers agree with. So,
uh, in the book, I understand the refugee as
a person who has been forcibly displaced, that is
forced to flee their own state of origin. And
is unable to return to it because of severe
threats to their lives, their human rights or their
basic needs, and their own state is unable or
unwilling to adequately protect them from these threats. And
that you're also right to say that. There is
in the law, a distinction between uh refugees and
migrants more broadly. So the key feature of, uh,
a refugee that distinguishes them from migrants more broadly
is the fact that they're forcibly displaced. They are
forced to flee, right? And they're unable to return
to their state of origin because of severe threats
to them. So this might distinguish them from other
migrants who may not be facing such severe threats,
but who voluntarily migrate for other reasons, um, and
may be able to return. Now, of course. Many
philosophers have said that this is not necessarily a
sharp or clean distinction. And for example, at the
marginal cases, there will be a migrant who's, uh,
leaving severe economic deprivation, uh, severe poverty, uh, in
order to migrate to another state to significantly improve
their material prospects and their quality of life. And
that person's gonna have very strong claims to admission.
um, BUT what I suggest in the book is
that. It's appropriate to have a broad, albeit imperfect
distinction, uh, without denying the claims to admission for
certain migrants. It's important to have a broad distinction
because refugees in being forcibly displaced and unable to
return, uh, will face and will continue to face
very significant harms and injustices in virtue of that
particular circumstance. And also one reason I think it's
important to maintain the imperfect distinction. Is because it
allows us to avoid the debate on immigration more
broadly, because many people will conflate the, uh, which
is a very natural thing to do, the question
of whether states have a right to control their
borders and whether they have a right to control
immigration with the question of obligations towards refugees. But
these are distinct but related questions. One can believe
states have a right to control their borders and
immigration, yet still agree they have obligations. To protect
refugees. So allowing that distinction means we can, we
don't have to settle the debate on immigration. Rather,
we can focus specifically on what obligations states have
towards refugees, and I think that helps us move
past sometimes often volatile and unproductive public debates about
immigration.
No, yeah, I think it's very important to establish
that distinction for us to or for people to
avoid as much as possible conflating refugees with broader,
broad migrants because, you know, nowadays the far right
and the conservative right many times take advantage of
people's ignorance because, I mean, to be very honest,
I don't think that most people have a proper
understanding of what a refugee is and the distinction
between a refugee and a regular migrant, but then
That contributes to the sort of anti-immigration narratives put
forth by the far right and the conservative right
where they sort of amalgamate refugees with regular migrants
and, and then they point to refugees and say,
oh why are they here we should control our
borders. They have no right to. HERE that they
call themselves refugees, but they are migrants, blah, blah,
blah, you know, that sort of rhetoric and if
when it comes to just regular migrants, uh, the
way we, I mean, many people tend to deal
with them and think about them nowadays is already
inhumane. I mean, it becomes even more severe if
we're talking about refugees, I guess.
Um, INDEED, so I think. There's sometimes in, in,
in the public discourse, um, the. Significant dangers, threats,
harms and justice that refugees are fleeing and have
faced is often lost, and I think focusing again
on um. The actual situation of refugees, um, the
experiences that they face trying to find safety, um,
and the barriers they face in trying to access
protection. And the stories that they have um. Uh,
OFTEN very, uh, upsetting stories, um, and their voices,
uh, just completely lost, um, in this debate, and
I think it's really worthwhile paying close attention to
that because this helps us understand, well, why in
particular we have obligations towards refugees, we, I mean
states in the global north, um. And what precisely
those obligations are, so I think it's really important
to maintain a close focus on that, yeah.
Mhm. Um, WHAT would you say uh characterizes contemporary
refugee movements?
Good. So, uh, I think according to the latest
figures that are available, there's 42.5 million refugees, uh,
worldwide, um, who have been. Forcibly displaced, forced to
flee their own states, um, because of war, conflict,
persecution, uh, widespread generalized violence and extensive human rights
violations, um, to seek adequate safety elsewhere. Now. Having
fled these threats, the vast majority of those refugees
having fled their own states of origin, have not
adequately found that safety. Rather, the vast majority of
refugees. Will live in squalid refugee camps for prolonged
periods of time, or they'll face destitution in urban
areas, um, in low and middle-income countries nearer their
states of origin. Um, AND in these conditions, refugees
will also face, uh, severe poverty, extensive violence, human
rights violations. A small minority, around 10%, um, embark
on perilous journeys to try and reach the, uh,
global North to try and claim asylum. And thousands
will die on their way. And so this is.
Obviously a very serious situation and in my view,
there's two morally significant features of global refugee displacement
which we need to focus on in order to
understand obligations towards them. And one is that. States
in the global north, by which I mean, uh,
the affluent and stable liberal democracies, um, so, uh,
European countries, the UK, Canada, the US, Australia, and
so forth.
Japan
indeed, yes, uh, so. One important feature of global
refugee displacement is that these countries, these global north
countries are not necessarily mere innocent bystanders overlooking these
harms that are occurring to refugees, um, but rather
they adopt a variety of policies and practices in
response to those refugees trying to seek safety on
their territories. Practices such as border violence, detention, uh,
forced encampment. And forced containment, which I can go
into more detail later on if you wish, um,
which result in significant harms and human rights violations
for refugees. And I think understanding that feature of
global refugee displacement is really important to understanding states'
negative obligations towards refugees, and I can explain what
I mean by negative obligations later on if you
wish. And then the second feature that I think
is really important to understand. Um, IS that Refugees
are in virtue of their displacement, um, subjected to
human rights violations, both in the causes of their
displacement and also whilst they're displaced. So they're continually
subjected to. Extreme and extensive human rights violations, both
in the cause of displacement while they're fleeing and
also whilst they're displaced. And I think this is
very significant to help us understand what states positive
obligations are to, to assist them. Provide protection to
them. So I think those two features of global
refugee displacement, the practices that states use in response
to refugees, and the fact that refugees endure significant
human rights violations are really important to understanding the
obligations that states have towards them.
Yes, we're going to certainly explore all of those
points that you touched on later in our conversation,
but I wanted to ask you before getting into
more of the philosophy of surrounding this discussion, discussion
about refugees. According to international law, for example, you
mentioned there, uh, forced detention, forced encampment, uh, are
those measures illegal according to international law or
not? Not necessarily. So as. As we'll see potentially
later as we go through, there's one core principle
in international refugee law, uh, and that principle is
the principle of non-refoulement, which means that if a
refugee arrives on one state's territory. 1 may not.
Uh, RETURN that refugee to any territory where their
life, freedom, or human rights would be under threat.
So if a refugee arrives on your territory, you
may not return them. To a territory where they
may be under threat. Now, that is the law.
So if you foul a refugee, you are breaking
international refugee law. Now, what a number of states
do is they adopt a variety of policies and
practices. To prevent or deter refugees from arriving. To
try and avoid that principle being operative. And so,
these practices of detention in third countries, encampment, and
containing refugees away from one's territory are not necessarily
under illegal under international law. Although some people may
argue that they constitute various human rights abuses or
crimes against humanity and so forth, um. They're not
necessarily illegal under international refugee law, but we might
think, and in fact, I do argue in the
book that these practices are ethically equivalent to refoulement
and ought also to be prohibited under international law.
Mhm. Uh, SO, I, I mean, in a broad
way, I, I mean, give us an overview of
the different kinds of takes that philosophers have on
how states should deal with refugees and whether they
should er er receive them or accept them or
not.
OK, good. So There's lots of different philosophical approaches
to understanding obligations towards refugees. Um, SO the primary
methodology by which political philosophers will engage with this
question is, um, through what I can call a
state-centric approach, which is a perfectly understandable and natural
approach to take when seeking to understand this, this
phenomenon. And the state-centric approach starts with a state
as the primary site of normative analysis. So we
start from the perspective of the state and then
we ask questions such as, well, how many refugees
should this state take in before it's taken in
its fair share? What costs are, are relevant to
the state when considering how it should, uh, whether
it should take in refugees, um, how should the
state interact with other states to share the responsibility
of refugee protection and so on and so forth.
And these are, of course, really important and vital
questions to ask. But what I suggest is that,
uh, myself and a number of other philosophers, uh,
adopt instead, uh, a refugee-centered methodology where instead we
just focus on the situation of refugees themselves, um,
to see. Um, THE situation that they're facing, and
then we theorize from there as the primary site
of normative analysis. And so then from that starting
point, you start asking, uh, different questions, but equally
important questions such as, well, what are the experiences
and barriers that these refugees are facing when they're
trying to seek protection? Uh, WHAT are the particular
harms and injustices that these refugees are subjected to
whilst they're displaced, um. What would be required for
those harms and injustices to be alleviated and so
forth. So from this, uh, methodology, you, you raised
these, uh, equally important questions which I think are
as essential to understanding state's obligations towards refugees. Now,
um, the dominant philosophical approach is an example of
the state-centric methodology, and it's called the duty of
rescue approach to understanding obligations to refugees. Now, this
approach, you know, has this state-centered methodology and it
holds that states in the global North are mere
innocent bystanders overlooking the harms that refugees are facing.
And these states have duties to rescue refugees from
this situation, either through resettlement, granting asylum, providing humanitarian
assistance. At least if they're able to do so
at little cost to themselves. Now, I think this
is an appropriate foundation for understanding obligations towards refugees,
but there's certain problems with it. And one of
the problems is that many philosophers adhere to this
approach, but nonetheless have wildly disagree about what it
entails. So some philosophers think that the duty of
rescue means we need to completely open all state
borders. And continue to admit refugees until the point
of societal collapse. Whereas other philosophers adopting the duty
of rescue. Argue we we're not necessarily obligated to
admit a single refugee. Some philosophers suggest the appropriate
response is, uh, expansive resettlement schemes. Some philosophers suggest
that military intervention in refugee states of origin is
the appropriate response. So despite agreement on this duty
of rescue principle, there's significant disagreement between philosophers about,
well, what are the weight and the specification of
the obligations towards refugees. And so what I tried
to do in the book then is we take
the refugee center methodology, we focus closely on the
situation of refugees. To try and provide more clarity
on this question. And if we take this refugee
centered methodology. It reveals at least two limitations of
the duty of rescue approach. Now, the first limitation
is that it doesn't pay enough attention to those
policies and practices that states use in response to
refugees, for example, border violence, detention, encampment, and containment,
which may make us question whether they really are
playing the role of the innocent bystander as the
duty of rescue approach presumes, but rather, they might
be, um. Directly harming refugees, and I think that's
important for understanding states' negative duties. And the other
thing, the other limitation of the duty of rescue
approach is this widespread disagreement on the specification and
weight of, uh, duties to protect refugees. And again,
if we focus closely on the situation of refugees.
Uh, WHICH will reveal that they, uh, endure significant
human rights violations in virtue of their displacement. And
understanding this fact helps us understand the precise nature,
weight, and specification of obligations towards them such that
we can break through that impasse and arrive at
an accurate understanding of obligations towards them.
Uh, WHEN it comes to, uh, an, uh, an,
an approach like the one you mentioned, the duty
to rescue approach which starts from a standpoint or
assumes a starting position where countries, particularly from the
global north, are just innocent bystanders. I mean, uh,
uh, do you think that because we're talking about
ethics here, do you think that, uh, arguments put
forward Particularly by people that fall more on the
left of the political spectrum. I mean, socialists, for
example, um, where when it comes to refugees and
even, for example, I, I don't want to mix
different categories of migrants here, but even sometimes when
it comes to economic migrants, uh, they say, oh
yeah, but we, we can't really start from the
This sort of innocent bystander position because we have
an entire history of colonization, for example, that has
consequences and effects even nowadays in terms of how
the political system is structured that facilitates oppression and
exploitation and also in a more direct way how
countries from the global north still Through a form
of what sometimes is called neo-colonization, economic colonization, exploit
people from the global south. And also in an
even more direct way, I would argue when, for
example, uh, countries from the global north, uh, particularly
Western Europe and the United States participate or initiate
even wars, for example, in the Middle East, in
Northeastern Africa, and so on. I mean they are
contributing to a refugee crisis if we want to
use that kind of uh term. Uh uh SO
I, I mean, do you think that Those things
and uh I mean, I don't know if you
want to comment on whether they are all valid
arguments or not, but do you think that we
should also take into account all of those things
when it comes to evaluating the ethics and particularly
the duties that countries from the global north should
have toward refugees from global south countries?
I see. So yes, I am sympathetic to that
argument. It's not an argument I personally make in,
in the book because there's a number of philosophers
who've made that argument very, very powerfully. Um, uh,
SO for example, James Suter has developed this argument.
Thoroughly, and I recommend his work on this issue.
So yes, you might think that states in the
global North are not innocent bystanders with reference to
refugee displacement, either because they are directly involved in
the conflicts that cause displacement, so invading other states,
for example. So, um, we can all think of
conflicts in which that would be the case, um,
but also it may be the case that they
are involved in, um. Selling arms to particular regimes
or particular factions in the civil war, or maybe
simply in virtue of, um, being the main participants
and architects in a global economic system, uh, which
foreseeably results in certain conflicts and, and so forth.
And then also perhaps the legacies of colonialism, um,
which have, um, drawn arbitrary lines on maps which
cause conflicts and also resource extraction, which results in
sort of resource depletion, which can then lead to
conflicts and so forth. So insofar as that may
be true, um. Then these states will have particularly
strong obligations to those refugees whom they've caused to
be displaced, and that, that, that would be true,
but, um. I'm skeptical of grounding obligations to all
refugees on this basis because it may be the
case, for example, that not all refugee crises are
the result of the acts of states in the
global north, right? And we would still want to
say we have obligations to protect those refugees, even
if we're not necessarily responsible for their plight. Um,
SO for example, um. The Ukrainian displacement is not
necessarily the result of the actions of states in
the global north, but we still would have obligations
to protect Ukrainian refugees, I would assume. And so.
I think this is a really important, um, tool
to understanding obligations towards refugees. It's certainly a factor
that can ground obligations to refugees, but I would
resist grounding obligations to all refugees on this basis
because some injustices are not necessarily the, the product
of. States and global. So what I, when I
say that states in the global north may not
be the innocent bystanders as according to the duty
of rescue approach, I mean something slightly different, which
is not that they are responsible for the harms
that refugees have endured in the causes of their
displacement, but rather they're responsible for the harms that
refugees endure whilst they're displaced. So whilst refugees have.
Fled their states, states in the global north will
adopt certain practices like border violence, putting refugees in
detention centers, forcing them into camps, containing them in
certain regions where they face severe threats to their
human rights. Now these are, I argue in the
book, harmful towards, uh, refugees, and in that sense,
states and global health are not innocent bystanders vis
a vis the harms that refugees experience whilst they're
displaced.
Right. Uh, I would, uh, like to ask you,
why do you think it's important to establish in
this particular context the distinction between negative duties and
positive duties?
OK, good, so. You're right that I've um. Draw
a distinction between negative and positive duties, um, which
I'll explain the terminology. So moral obligations can be
divided into, uh, negative and positive obligations or negative
and positive duties. I use duties and obligations interchangeably.
Now, negative duties or obligations are an agent's duties
not to harm or violate the rights of others.
So, for example, we all have negative duties not
to subject people to torture, not to put people
in conditions where torture will occur to them. These
are negative duties not to harm or violate the
rights of others. Now negative duties are taken to
be particularly strong duties, perhaps the most fundamental moral
duties that we all have. Our duty is not
to harm others. Now positive duties. Or obligations are
duties to perform an act that would benefit or
otherwise assist, uh, another person. So for example, you
may have a positive duty to save someone from
being tortured if you could simply warn them, for
example, right? And it would be morally wrong to
let them be tortured if you could save them
at a little cost to yourself. Now, Negative duties
are primarily understood to be particularly strong duties and
stronger than one's, uh, positive duties. That's not to
say that one's positive duties are weak, but that
all else being equal, one has a stronger negative
duty not to subject someone to harm, uh, compared
to one's positive duty to save them from comparable
harm. And so these duties are grounded in what
I call basic normative commitments, that is. They are
endorsed by all plausible normative ethical theories. They're endorsed
by the ethical tenets of all, um, ethical religious
doctrines, and they're widely accepted in common morality across,
uh, an overlapping consensus of reasonable comprehensive doctrines, so.
Nearly everyone agrees that we have these obligations, these
moral obligations. And so I'm trying to draw on
these core common moral commitments, um, to understand states'
negative and positive duties towards refugees. Now, I think
this is important, this distinction, because most of the
philosophical literature has focused only on the positive duties
to protect refugees. What positive obligations the states have
to perform an act to help refugees. And there
hasn't been sufficient attention focused on the negative obligations
of states not to harm or violate the rights
of refugees. So I think an account of this
has been missing in the philosophical literature and it's
very, very important. And the distinction is also important
because focusing on the positive duties we, as we
saw earlier, there's a lot of disagreement about, well,
what precisely are the positive obligations, right? And so,
um. As I suggest in the book, we need
to focus on the situation of refugees, and that's
a way in which you can more properly understand
the positive duties. And the thought is we need
an account of both the negative and the positive
duties, uh, of states towards refugees if we want
a full account of state's obligations towards refugees.
So what kinds of state practices are used, or
at least which are the more commonly used in
response to refugees, and which of them do you
think can be or should be classified as either
doing or allowing harm? And I mean in this
particular case of dealing with refugees, what counts as
harm?
OK, good. So So I appeal to the doctrine
of doing and allowing harm, um. Which to explain
is uh. The principle that It's morally worse and
requires a higher level of justification to do harm
rather than fail to aid and simply allow harm
to someone. So this maps onto the distinction between
negative and positive duties. One has stronger negative duties
not to torture a person oneself compared to one's
positive duties to save someone from torture, right? And
so I employ this distinction which is widely accepted
in common morality owing to the widely accepted robust
moral constraint against harming people. Uh, I appealed to
this. To draw attention to certain practices and try
and classify them as doing or allowing harm. And
if these practices are doing harm. Then states that
employ them are not mere innocent bystanders disconnected from
the harms refugees, but are actively harming innocent refugees
looking for safety. And if that's true, then they
will have urgent negative duties to refrain from unjustly
harming those refugees and or rectify the harm caused.
So a lot matters on whether these practices are
in fact doing and allowing harm. So then I
look at certain practices. In the book, uh, and
classify them as either doing and allowing harm. Now
some practices I look at include border violence. So
for example, um, the UK has invested millions in
supporting the CRS riot police in France who are
reported to engage in violence against refugees, beaten with
batons, often during evictions of camps. Also tactics of
intimidation, harassment, confiscation of personal property, and so forth.
And to take another example, on the Hungarian border
with Serbia, there's been reports of violent pushbacks of
refugees, refugees being beaten for hours on end, causing
life changing injuries and so forth. And these are
just two examples of a wider trend of violence,
pushbacks, crackdowns of refugees at many European state borders,
including Greece and Italy and so forth, as well
as the US-Mexico border. Now border violence is straightforwardly
doing harm to refugees, um. It causes them, um,
to occupy a level of well-being that's far lower
than it would have been in the nearest possible
world in which they weren't subjected to these tactics
of violence and so forth. So that's one practice.
Uh, ANOTHER practice is detention. So, for example. Um,
IN an arrangement between, um, Italy and other EU
states on the one hand and Libya on the
other hand, um. Refugees who are trying to make
that crossing across the Mediterranean Sea from North Africa
to Italy are intercepted and returned to be placed
in detention centers on the Libyan coast as well
as in the Libyan mainland, and in these detention
centers, refugees face overcrowding, disease, starvation, as well as,
um, human rights abuses from the Libyan authorities, including
uh rape and sexual violence, torture, even being traded
as slaves. Now of course, detention again is. A
practice that harms these refugees, it causes them to
be much worse off, uh, much worse off, sorry,
in aspects of their well-being, their mental and physical
health, their freedom, their human rights, than they would
have been in the nearest possible world in which
they were not placed in these detention centers. So
that straightforwardly harms them. Another practice is, uh, sorry,
uh, encampment. Um, SO for example, Uh, as part
of the EU-Turkey deal, uh, initiated in 2016, uh,
refugees who had made the crossing across the Aegean
Sea from Turkey to Greece and arrived on those
Greek islands, um, were forcibly enclosed into camps and
denied onward movement to the Greek mainland and to,
uh, the European mainland. And, um, they're made to
stay in these camps and there was a lack
of adequate sanitation and, um, subsistence support and also
extensive human rights violations within these camp settings. Uh,
MANY of them have since been closed and replaced
with these controlled access centers which similarly deny refugees
free movement and so forth, and there's all reports
for, uh, concerning human rights abuses in these centers
as well. So this similar detention is harmful to
refugees, uh, insofar as it makes them much worse
off than they would have been had they not
been forced into these camps. Um, AND then the
final practice that I consider, which is not exhaustive
of all the practice, by the way, um, but,
uh, one important practice to consider is the practice
of containment. Now containment, um. Containment policies are exactly
that, they are policies initiated by states that seek
to contain refugees away from the state's territory. In
regions closer to refugee states of origin. Um, BUT
the direct result of these containment policies is that
refugees are contained in certain regions. Where they face
extreme poverty, uh, severe threats to their lives and
freedoms, and extensive human rights violations. So, for example,
that arrangement with Libya, um, blocks that migratory route
to seek safety in, in, in Europe and. Thereby
contains refugees in Libya and other regions in North
Africa, where they face immense, uh, extensive human rights
abuses and so forth. And that EU Turkey deal
blocks that migratory route from Turkey to Greece and
in doing so, contains refugees in regions closer to
their states of origin in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon
where they face, um, severe harms, uh. Poverty, extreme
human rights abuses, especially for those refugees right now,
um, in Lebanon who, uh, are facing increased risks
as a, as a result of the conflict there.
And so these policies of containment. Um, THEY'RE quite
difficult to classify. So I spent some time in
the book trying to classify whether containment is doing
or allowing harm to refugees. And I, and I
can explain if you wish, my conclusion there.
No, yes, please, please do so. Yeah.
OK, so what I suggest is that containment should
be understood as what I call a denial of
escape case. Now, a denial of escape case is
where. There's a potentially harmful sequence of events that's
threatening a person, but there's a pre-existing means for
that person to simply escape that threat of harm,
um. But what happens is then an agent acts
to place an obstacle in the way, which prevents
the victim from escaping the harm. Such that the
victim is in fact harmed, um, by that sequence
of events. So for example, if there was uh
a person. Um, WHO was on some train tracks
through no fault of their own, and there was
a train coming towards them, but they could simply
step aside and let the train go by so
they could escape the threat of harm, but then
you act to tie them to the tracks such
that they cannot escape. Um, SUCH that they are
then harmed, then. That's a denial of escape case,
and I suggest denial of escape cases like that
are, uh, doing harm. They count as doing harm.
So, and I think containment is a denial of
escape case. Refugees are in harm's way. They're facing
human rights abuses, um, uh, severe threats to their
lives and freedoms, extreme poverty and whatever, um, but
fortunately, there's, uh, a pre-existing means of escape. They
are. They can claim asylum and seek safety in
northern states territories, as is their human right. By
the way, Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, they have the right to seek and
claim asylum. Mhm. Um, BUT then what these states
do is they perform an act to introduce a
containment policy, right, which blocks that means of escape.
Such that they are no longer able to escape
those harms, such that they then endure those harms.
So it'd be the equivalent of, say, well, it
wouldn't necessarily be the equivalent, but another denial of
escape case would be, for example, um, blocking the
fire exit to a burning building such that people
cannot escape, and that I suggest constitutes doing harm.
So I think if we understand containment. As a
denial of escape case, which I think it is,
then this yields the conclusion that it constitutes doing
harm. So states that uh initiate containment policies are,
are doing harm and then I think an interesting
implication follows from this. Uh, SO at the top
of the interview, we were talking about whether some
of these practices like containment are illegal, and currently
containment is not illegal under international refugee law. But,
uh, refoulement is illegal under the international refugee law.
So that is the practice of, so the principle
of non-refoulement holds that if a refugee arrives in
your territory. You may not return that refugee to
any territory where their life, freedom, or human rights
would be under threat. So that is a principle
of international law, uh, it's widely adhered to, uh,
among states, um. Now violating non-refoulement, that is um.
Returning a refugee to a situation. In which harms
may occur to them does not necessarily cause the
harms or the harmful circumstances, but place refugees in
those circumstances. So refoulement would be the equivalent of
returning, um, so throwing an innocent child who had
escaped onto your dry land back into a pond
where they may drown. That's what refoulement would be.
And it's widely agreed that this would be morally
unthinkable and it's prohibited in international refugee law. But
now consider containment, which uh concerns. Containing refugees away
from one's territory in regions where they face severe
threats to their lives, human rights and basic needs.
Now this would be the equivalent of holding an
innocent child at arm's length, uh, in a, in
a pond where they may drown, uh, preventing them
from swimming to safety onto one's dry land. So
it's holding them at arm's length such that they
will face this harm. Now what I suggest in
the book is that there's no more difference between
these acts. There's no moral difference between throwing an
innocent child back into the pond where they may
drown and holding an innocent child at arm's length
in the pond where they may drown, preventing them
from swimming to safety onto your dry land. And
if refoulement is equivalent to throwing an innocent child,
uh, back into the water where they may drown,
and if containment is the equivalent to holding an
innocent child in the water where they may drown,
and if there's no moral difference between holding and
throwing an innocent child into the water, then there's
no moral difference between refinement and containment. So, containment
ought to also be prohibited under international law, um,
as an implication of. It being a denial of
escape case and morally equivalent to refoulement. It's the
same moral wrong being committed in both refoulement and
containment, and so containment ought to also be prohibited
under international law.
Are there circumstances where certain harms to refugees might
be justified, and if so, on what grounds and
which kinds of harms?
OK, good. So, We can imagine there might be,
so the first thing to say is harm to
others is not always. Unjustified, always wrong, um. So
harm might be permissible in self-defense, for example, or
harm might be permissible as a lesser evil, uh,
to prevent some greater harm or wrong. Mhm. So
we can imagine some extreme circumstances in which it
might be permissible to harm refugees in these ways.
Um, SO perhaps, for example, to prevent some moral
catastrophe to, uh, that would. Cause a greater amount
of harm to a far greater amount of innocent
people, so there might be some extreme circumstances. In
which these harms, uh, might be justified. But what
I suggest in the book is that. In nearly
all foreseeable and likely circumstances, current practices that harm
refugees. Are not justified and are not going to
be justifiable, um. And the way I show this
is, well, we might think, well, one natural potential
justification for these practices would be, look, um, states
have a right to control their borders. Um, THIS
is recognized in international law, states have a right
to control their borders. And so states are permitted
to adopt certain practices, uh, to prevent and deter
refugee arrivals, even if those practices are harmful. Um,
BUT what I argue in the book is that
the justifications, the philosophical justifications for a right to
control borders are not gonna be sufficient to justify
these harms against refugees. And so. For example, a.
States are held to have a right to self-determination
to determine their own internal affairs, uh, which includes
a right to control their borders, admissions onto their
territory, and, uh, entrance into the political community. Now,
this right is grounded on numerous philosophical grounds or
has been argued to be justified on numerous philosophical
grounds. For example, states may have. Uh, IMPORTANT political,
economic, or cultural interests, um, in determining who joins
the political community. Uh, STATES and their citizens may
have associative ownership claims over the state institutions and
the public goods, and a state and its citizens
have a right to freedom of association. Um, TO
decide who, if anyone, it would like to join
their association, and they have a right to exclude
anyone that they don't wish to join their association.
Now, what I say is that these justifications are
not going to be able to justify current harmful
practices against refugees. So, for example, take the political,
cultural, and economic interests. First of all, It's not
obviously the case that refugees would have a negative
impact on a state's political, cultural, or economic interests.
Refugees can and do provide a significant economic and
cultural contribution to states, for example. But even if
that's true, even if they, they would pose such
a cost, um, even the defenders of that view
make an exception for refugees, because refugees have particularly
urgent claims to protection, to protect their, um, their
lives, their human rights, their basic needs. And so
Defend defenders of this justification of a right to
control borders will make exceptions for refugees. So refugees
should not even be denied entrance, let alone harmed,
right? So it's not gonna work there. But the
only philosophical justification that might be able to justify
harmful practices towards refugees is this right to freedom
of association because. If we think of like an
individual case of freedom of association, you have a
right to preserve your freedom of association from the
unwanted association of others. So for example, if someone
was trying to constantly harass you or follow you
around, now you would be permitted to harm them.
In order to preserve your freedom of association, so
perhaps also then states and citizens of those states
in order to maintain their free association and not
to associate with people that don't want to may
harm refugees in order to prevent them from associating.
Now what I suggest is that, well, there are
important moral constraints. On whether it's permissible to harm
others in order to preserve one's freedom of association.
So, these are, for example, uh, there's 3 constraints,
the necessity constraint, the proportionality constraint, and the moral
responsibility constraint. So the necessity constraint simply holds that,
well, harm is permissible to preserve one's freedom of
association. If and only if that harm is necessary
to preserve one's freedom of association, it's the least
harmful means one has available of preserving one's freedom
of association. So in that harasser case, maybe inflicting
some harm on them is necessary to preserve one's
freedom of association. But that's not the case with
states and refugees. Rather, there's numerous policy alternatives available
to states aside from these particular harmful practices. So
if the aim is to, for example, Prevent irregular
journeys across dangerous journeys, then these harmful practices are
not necessary or effective, uh, at dissuading these, uh,
uh, dangerous journeys, but providing safe and regular routes
would be effective at preventing these dangerous journeys. Whereas
if the aim is simply to prevent refugee arrivals.
Overall, then again, there's non-harmful alternatives. States could, uh,
massively increase their foreign aid spending to provide the
infrastructure and support in refugees, uh, so in regions
near refugee states of origin, um, to provide adequate
human rights protection, the infrastructure required so refugees are
able to work, participate in the local economy, have
education. These kind of, um, interventions demonstrably disincentivize onward
journeys to states in the global North, so these
harmful practices are not necessary. Um, NOW the proportionality
constraint is that harm to preserve freedom of association
is permissible, uh, if and only if that harm
is proportionate. So that involves comparing the harm you're
going to inflict to preserve one's freedom of association
relative to the potential imposition, uh, one's seeking to
avert. So in the harassment case, for example, inflicting
some harm on the harasser seems permissible, um, because
that's proportionate relative to the threat that they're posing
you constantly trying to, uh, uh, associate with you,
such that you're unable to continue your life uninhibited
by this unwanted association. But when we consider The
potential imposition of the inclusion of a given number
of refugees within one's political community. Um, THERE doesn't
seem to be a substantial individual imposition on everyone's
everyday interactions. Your right to freedom of association does
not include a right to decide who lives down
the street from you, who you share a neighborhood
with, who you share public transport with. So it's
not a significant imposition on one's freedom of association
any more so than the existence of any other
human being within one's community would be an imposition
on one's freedom of association. And it's not a
significant imposition at the political level because states and
their citizens retain rights to political self-determination, to participate
in the political processes and so forth. So it's
not a substantial imposition there either. And then if
you compare that to the significant harms caused to
tens if not hundreds of thousands of refugees, including
immense mental and physical suffering, extensive human rights abuses,
torture, sexual violence, kidnapping, and so forth, um, and
also death, it seems these harms are grossly disproportionate.
And then the final constraint is the moral responsibility
constraint. In order to be permissible to harm in
order to preserve one's freedom of association, that harm
must be concentrated on persons who are morally responsible
for posing an unjust threat to oneself. So what
this means is that in order to be liable
to harm, one must be morally responsible for posing
an unjust threat. So that harasser. In the harassment
case is morally responsible for posing an unjust act
because they're acting wrongfully, they're acting culpably, um, they
could have avoided posing that threat to you, but
they chose to do it anyway. They've acted wrongfully,
therefore they're liable to defensive harm, which makes it
permissible to harm them, whereas refugees. Are not morally
responsible for the imposition because they lack reasonable alternatives
to avoid it. Because they're facing extensive harms and
threats to their lives and human rights and basic
needs and. Their only means of escaping these threats,
in many cases, is to try and seek safety
in another state, in the global north. And so
they're innocent people. Um, AND so harming them is
gonna violate this moral responsibility constraint. So through this
analysis, we see that current harmful practices against refugees,
um, cause unnecessary disproportionate harm to innocent people. And
for that reason, they cannot be justified by a
state's right to control their borders.
So another topic that you explore in your book
has to do with direct and structural injustices. So
what are direct and structural injustices, and could you
give us an example of them?
Good, um. So a direct injustice is quite straightforward.
A direct injustice is an unjust outcome that's the
direct result of and attributable to a specific act
or a policy which was enacted by a relatively
unconstrained actor who could have acted otherwise. So for
example, um, if a legislator decides to deprive, uh,
an ethnic minority of the right to vote. That's
a direct injustice, right? It's an unjust outcome that's
directly the result of a specific policy enacted by
a specific actor who could have done otherwise, right?
That's a direct injustice. Now a structural injustice, as
I understand it, is an unjust outcome which is
not the direct result of a specific individual's act.
Uh, AND it's not the direct result of a
specific state policy or a specific, um, institution's policy,
but rather, it is the unintended consequence of, um,
structural processes which are constituted by a multitude, sometimes
thousands, sometimes millions of different agents who are each
acting for their morally acceptable ends. So Iris Marion
Young introduces this um concept of structural injustice and
she uses this example of an individual facing homelessness
in the US in where the fact that she's
facing homelessness is an unjust outcome, but it's not
necessarily the result of someone who specifically wronged her
or violated her right or specific policy. Um, THAT'S
been directed against her. Rather, it's the, it's the
outcome of all these different processes, um, wage rates,
rent increases, uh, legislation governing, so, um, where new
housing will be built, um, public transport, accessibility, all
these kind of processes, um, landlords seeking to increase
profits, all these kind of different processes interact to
create this unjust outcome. But no one could be
necessarily blamed for this outcome. No one's necessarily acted
wrongfully, but nonetheless, everyone who's connected to this, uh,
unjust outcome has responsibilities to help address it. Now
the reason why this is. Uh, RELEVANT to this
debate on state practices towards refugees is that, um,
There's a philosopher, Serena Perek, whose work on um.
Obligations to refugees is a huge source of inspiration
to me, it's brilliant, um. Uh, HER work, she
understands the harms that refugees endure as a result
of Northern state practices. She suggests that it's a
structural injustice, right? Uh, I disagree with her. Uh,
I agree that refugees face an injustice as a
result of Northern state practices, um. But I just
disagree that it's a structural injustice. Rather, I suggest
that it's a direct injustice. And I suggest that
this is, well, it's a direct injustice insofar as
the harms that refugees face can be traced to
specific policies. Enacted by particular states. Um, WHO I
think are acting wrongfully, could have acted otherwise, and
I worry that. If we adopt a structural. Um,
INJUSTICE model of responsibility, it, it lets actors who've
acted wrongfully off the hook, so to speak. It
absolves them of moral responsibility for the unjust harms
that they've caused, and instead it, um. It distributes
responsibility very widely and it entails that state actors,
for example, who are connected to the injustice only
have a sort of weak remedial responsibility to help,
uh, address the injustice. Whereas if we understand it
as a direct injustice, uh, which I think is
accurate. Uh, THEN we see that states who enact
these harmful policies are acting wrongfully and have urgent,
compulsory negative moral duties to refrain from these unjust
policies and rectify the harms caused. So, I think
it matters greatly whether, um, these are direct obstructural
injustices, and I think there's good reason to think
that they are, in fact, direct injustices against refugees.
So what are then the positive duties of states
toward refugees?
OK, so, So that was the first half of
my book, as it were. So focusing on the
negative duties of, uh, refugees, where I've argued that.
Certain states in the global North are not innocent
bystanders, um, they adopt practices that harm refugees. These
practices are not justified, and this is a direct
injustice. Um, SO this grounds strong negative duties of
states to reform current practices. But what about, as
you said, these, um, these positive duties. Uh, POSITIVE
duties to provide a benefit or otherwise assist or
protect refugees. I suggest again if we focus on
the situation of refugees, um, this helps us to
understand the nature, weight, and specification of positive duties
towards them. So if we look at the situation
of refugees. We see that, well, Most refugees come
from um. Are fleeing severe human rights violations in
their states of origin as a result of war,
conflicts and persecution or whatever it might be. So
this includes targeted bombing of civilian areas, um, Um,
generalized violence, cruel and degrading treatment, torture, sexual and
gender-based violence, ethnic cleansing, uh, forced disappearances, extrajudicial killings,
um. And potential genocide. So these are the causes
of refugee displacement. This is why refugees are fleeing
their states of origin. Uh, AND that's true in,
um, for example, the, the six states that produce
the most refugees, um, Ukraine, Afghanistan, Syria, uh, Sudan,
Venezuela, South Sudan. Uh, SO they're, they're facing human
rights violations in their states of origin. That's why
they've fled. And then once they've left their states
of origin, again, they haven't necessarily found safety, but
rather they'll either reside in refugee camps for prolonged
periods of time. This is true for the vast
majority of, of, of refugees. They'll either face a
life in refugee camps for prolonged periods of time
or a life in urban areas where they'll have
a sub-citizen status. They won't be granted equality before
the law, so they'll be subjected to. Additional human
rights violations without protection or recourse to the, the
law, or they'll risk their lives on dangerous journeys
to try and reach the global North, in which
case, again, they're vulnerable to significant human rights violations
from traffickers, from border officials, and so forth. So
refugees are also facing these human rights violations whilst
they're displaced, either in camps. Or urban areas or
um on journeys and this is important for understanding
obligations towards them because. The violations that refugees are
subjected to. In virtue of their displacement involve significant
additional harms that I think are often not sufficiently
recognized. So it's not merely the case that refugees
are severely like physically suffering and have certain biological
needs of food, water, shelter, and so forth, but
additionally, they're facing these harms as a result of
these violations which include a violation of their autonomy.
Their control over their life has been completely disrupted,
um. And they have very little opportunities to live
their lives or rebuild their lives according to their
own wishes. And they don't have much control over
their own environment or their existence or, or anything
like that. So this violation of autonomy is, is
profound. They also endure a violation of, uh, a
dignified existence, uh, of their dignity insofar as. They're
often forced to endure conditions and treatment which are
below acceptable standards for a dignified existence. Think of,
um, squalid refugee camps, for example, or facing extreme
destitution in urban areas without any sort of protection
from the local authorities and so forth. They also
endure a violation of their moral worth or, uh,
you might describe this as a violation of their
humanity insofar as they're not viewed and treated as
equal human beings with equal moral worth, but rather,
they're viewed and treated as less, as subhuman, as
having inferior moral worth. And that would be true.
In the violations they're subjected to, the people subjecting
them to this treatment will be treating them as
inferior, but also it's true, as we can see
in various media representations, um, or representations by the
political class and states in the global North that
refugees aren't, um, recognized necessarily as equal human beings,
but rather that they're viewed and treated as something
less. So these, these harms are very significant, and
I think they're, um. Relevant to understanding obligations towards
them. Um And then there's also another important phenomenon
that refugees endure whilst they're displaced. Um, WHICH is
one that Hannah Arendt identified, and it's the phenomenon
of rightlessness. Which entails that. Well, refugees may have
human rights on paper, right, because all human beings
have equal human rights, um, but they are subjected
to abuses and violence regardless, as if they had
no human rights whatsoever, right? So in this sense,
they are rightless, uh, as Hannah Arendt identified, which
I understand as. They lack the capabilities to enjoy
the content of their human rights. So, though they
may have a right against torture, for example, on
paper. Uh, THEY lack the substantive right because they
do not have the capabilities to enjoy that human
right against torture because they can be subjected to
that rights violation regardless. So, one way of trying
to understand this phenomenon of rightlessness is like to
imagine you're um like a citizen of the UK.
And then you consider your rights, your human right
against cruel and degrading treatment, for example. Now, you
would probably barely even need to think about this
right against cruel and degrading treatment because there's a,
a vast infrastructure in place in the UK that
protects your right. Uh, THERE'S, uh, enforcement mechanisms, there's,
uh, laws, there's police, there's these, um. There's vast
infrastructure in place as well as an economic system
in place to facilitate this protection mechanism, such that
you can go through your life never even worrying
about your right against cruel and degrading treatment. But
then suppose that the UK descends into a civil
war, uh, the government collapses, there's extensive violence everywhere,
and then you have to flee the UK and
so you make it across the Channel on a
small boat to France to try and claim asylum.
Um, And you end up in a refugee camp
with lots of other, um, British refugees. And then
Imagine now your human right against cruel and degrading
treatment if someone tries to threaten your right. Now
that that infrastructure is not in place anymore. There's
no one you can turn to, there's no British
government who's going to try and protect your right.
So if someone threatens your right, whether that be
a border official, a trafficker or something like that.
Your right very likely will be violated and in
this sense, you don't really have the right against
cruel and degrading treatment because you're going to be
subjected to that abuse regardless and there's no one
you can turn to. So, this is a phenomenon
that refugees face, and I think that's also really
important to understanding obligations towards them. And so, looking
at this situation, the harms that refugees face as
a result of the violations and their rightlessness means
that positive duties towards them. Shouldn't merely be to
alleviate any physical harms, but need to address this
violation of autonomy by providing opportunities for refugees to
have an autonomous existence, um, to rebuild their lives
according to their own wishes. It needs to respond
to the harm to dignity by providing opportunities for
refugees to have a dignified existence away from the
squalor of certain, uh, refugee camps, for example, that
have a decent standard of living, um. It needs
to respond to that harm to moral worth, so
refugees need to be viewed and treated with respect
as moral equals, um, and also, Um, conditions should
be secured in which they're viewed and treated as
moral equals by others, and there needs to be
this human rights protection in order to, um, address
the rightlessness that they experience. So I think that
then is the proper understanding of positive duties towards
them.
So I have one final question or topic I
would like to explore here. So are there any
circumstances or instances where the states can violate human
rights in regards to how they treat refugees?
Do you mean Are there any circumstances in which
it would be permissible for states to violate human
rights?
Yes, exactly, yeah.
I mean this may relate to a question we
spoke about earlier where. We might think that. Rights
provide strong constraints against actions towards persons, um, but
they might not necessarily be absolute constraints. We might
think that there could be some extreme circumstances in
which it might be permissible, um, to violate rights
in order to prevent some moral catastrophes such as
like the deaths of many millions of people or
some such. But I think it's going to be
very hard, if not impossible, to justify the violating
of refugees' human rights that we currently see as
a result of state practices because such violations, as
I suggested earlier, are are not necessary, proportionate, um,
and they're against innocent persons. And I think this.
So I, I, in principle, yes, but I can't
foresee any circumstance, um. In in the real world
in, in, in which that would be permissible, no.
Mhm. No, that, that's fair enough. So, uh, the
book is again, the ethics of state Responses to
refugees, and I'm of course leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Hilliard Smith, uh, apart from the book, where can
people find you and your work on the internet?
Um, YEAH, I have a website, Bradley HilliersSmith.com, I
think. Uh, SO you can find out about my
research there, and, yeah.
OK, I will add that to the description of
the interview and thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
great to talk with you.
OK, thank you so much, it's been great to
talk with you too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.